blogs/sample-docker-compose-guide.md, before:

---
title: "Getting Started with Docker Compose: A Practical Guide"
date: "2025-01-15"
category: "DevOps"
tags: ["Docker", "Docker Compose", "Containers", "DevOps"]
excerpt: "Learn how to use Docker Compose to manage multi-container applications. This guide covers the basics of docker-compose.yml files, common commands, and a practical example of deploying a web application with a database."
author: "Roshan Nagekar"
---

![Docker Compose Banner](/images/blog-images/sample-docker-compose-guide/docker-compose-banner.svg)

## Introduction

**Docker Compose** is a powerful tool for defining and running multi-container Docker applications. Instead of managing multiple containers individually, you can define your entire application stack in a single YAML file and manage it with simple commands.

In this guide, you'll learn how to use Docker Compose to orchestrate multiple containers, making your development and deployment workflow much simpler.

## Why Docker Compose?

Before Docker Compose, developers had to:

- Run multiple `docker run` commands with complex arguments
- Manually link containers together
- Keep track of environment variables across containers
- Restart containers in the correct order

**Docker Compose** solves all of these problems with declarative configuration.

## Prerequisites

Before we begin, make sure you have:

- Docker installed on your system
- Basic understanding of Docker containers
- A text editor for creating configuration files

## Installing Docker Compose

Docker Compose comes pre-installed with Docker Desktop. For Linux users, you can install it separately:

```bash
# Download Docker Compose
sudo curl -L "https://github.com/docker/compose/releases/latest/download/docker-compose-$(uname -s)-$(uname -m)" -o /usr/local/bin/docker-compose

# Make it executable
sudo chmod +x /usr/local/bin/docker-compose

# Verify installation
docker-compose --version
```

## Basic Docker Compose Structure

A `docker-compose.yml` file defines services, networks, and volumes. Here's the basic structure:

```yaml
version: '3.8'

services:
  service-name:
    image: image-name:tag
    ports:
      - "host:container"
    environment:
      - KEY=value
    volumes:
      - host-path:container-path
```

## Practical Example: Web App with Database

Let's build a complete example with a **Node.js** application and a **PostgreSQL** database.

![Application Architecture](/images/blog-images/sample-docker-compose-guide/architecture-diagram.svg)

### Step 1: Create the Project Structure

```bash
mkdir my-docker-app
cd my-docker-app
```

### Step 2: Create docker-compose.yml

```yaml
version: '3.8'

services:
  # PostgreSQL Database
  database:
    image: postgres:15-alpine
    container_name: my_postgres_db
    environment:
      POSTGRES_USER: myuser
      POSTGRES_PASSWORD: mypassword
      POSTGRES_DB: myappdb
    ports:
      - "5432:5432"
    volumes:
      - postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data
    networks:
      - app-network
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD-SHELL", "pg_isready -U myuser"]
      interval: 10s
      timeout: 5s
      retries: 5

  # Node.js Application
  webapp:
    image: node:18-alpine
    container_name: my_node_app
    working_dir: /app
    environment:
      DATABASE_URL: postgres://myuser:mypassword@database:5432/myappdb
      NODE_ENV: development
    ports:
      - "3000:3000"
    volumes:
      - ./app:/app
      - /app/node_modules
    command: npm start
    depends_on:
      database:
        condition: service_healthy
    networks:
      - app-network

  # Redis Cache (Optional)
  cache:
    image: redis:7-alpine
    container_name: my_redis_cache
    ports:
      - "6379:6379"
    networks:
      - app-network

volumes:
  postgres_data:

networks:
  app-network:
    driver: bridge
```

### Step 3: Understanding the Configuration

Let's break down the key components:

| Component | Purpose | Example |
|-----------|---------|---------|
| services | Defines containers to run | webapp, database, cache |
| ports | Maps host:container ports | "3000:3000" |
| volumes | Persists data and mounts code | postgres_data, ./app:/app |
| networks | Allows container communication | app-network |
| depends_on | Controls startup order | webapp depends on database |

## Essential Docker Compose Commands

Here are the most common commands you'll use:

```bash
# Start all services in detached mode
docker-compose up -d

# View running services
docker-compose ps

# View logs from all services
docker-compose logs

# View logs from a specific service
docker-compose logs webapp

# Follow logs in real-time
docker-compose logs -f

# Stop all services
docker-compose stop

# Stop and remove containers, networks
docker-compose down

# Stop and remove everything including volumes
docker-compose down -v

# Rebuild images
docker-compose build

# Restart a specific service
docker-compose restart webapp
```

![Docker Compose Commands](/images/blog-images/sample-docker-compose-guide/commands-cheatsheet.svg)

## Advanced Features

### Environment Variables

You can use a `.env` file to manage environment variables:

```bash
# .env file
POSTGRES_VERSION=15
NODE_VERSION=18
APP_PORT=3000
```

Then reference them in `docker-compose.yml`:

```yaml
services:
  webapp:
    image: node:${NODE_VERSION}-alpine
    ports:
      - "${APP_PORT}:3000"
```

### Scaling Services

You can scale services to run multiple instances:

```bash
# Run 3 instances of the webapp
docker-compose up -d --scale webapp=3
```

### Health Checks

Health checks ensure services are ready before dependent services start:

```yaml
healthcheck:
  test: ["CMD", "curl", "-f", "http://localhost:3000/health"]
  interval: 30s
  timeout: 10s
  retries: 3
  start_period: 40s
```

## Best Practices

1. **Use specific image tags** - Don't use `latest` in production
2. **Separate development and production configs** - Use `docker-compose.prod.yml`
3. **Keep secrets secure** - Use Docker secrets or external secret management
4. **Use .dockerignore** - Exclude unnecessary files from the build context
5. **Named volumes for data** - Never use bind mounts for database data in production

> **Tip:** Always use health checks for databases and critical services to ensure proper startup order.

## Common Issues and Solutions

### Issue 1: Port Already in Use

**Problem:** `Error: bind: address already in use`

**Solution:**
```bash
# Find what's using the port
sudo lsof -i :3000

# Stop the conflicting service or change the port mapping
ports:
  - "3001:3000"
```

### Issue 2: Volume Permission Errors

**Problem:** Permission denied when writing to volumes

**Solution:**
```yaml
services:
  webapp:
    user: "${UID}:${GID}"  # Use host user ID
```

### Issue 3: Containers Can't Communicate

**Problem:** Containers can't reach each other

**Solution:** Ensure they're on the same network and use service names (not localhost):
```yaml
# Use this
DATABASE_URL: postgres://database:5432

# Not this
DATABASE_URL: postgres://localhost:5432
```

## Real-World Use Cases

Docker Compose is perfect for:

- **Development environments** - Replicate production locally
- **CI/CD pipelines** - Consistent test environments
- **Microservices architecture** - Manage multiple services
- **Integration testing** - Spin up dependencies quickly

## Monitoring and Debugging

### View Resource Usage

```bash
# Check container stats
docker stats

# Or using compose
docker-compose top
```

### Execute Commands in Running Containers

```bash
# Access database shell
docker-compose exec database psql -U myuser -d myappdb

# Access application shell
docker-compose exec webapp sh

# Run a one-off command
docker-compose run webapp npm test
```

## Summary

In this guide, we covered:

- Installing and setting up Docker Compose
- Understanding the docker-compose.yml structure
- Building a multi-container application with database and cache
- Essential commands for managing containers
- Best practices and common troubleshooting

**Docker Compose** simplifies container orchestration and makes it easy to define complex applications as code.

## Conclusion

Docker Compose is an essential tool in the modern DevOps toolkit. By defining your infrastructure as code, you gain reproducibility, version control, and simplified deployment workflows.

Start small with a single service, then gradually add more components as you become comfortable with the tool. The declarative nature of Docker Compose makes it easy to understand and maintain your application architecture.

Happy containerizing! 🐋

---

## References

- [Official Docker Compose Documentation](https://docs.docker.com/compose/)
- [Docker Compose GitHub Repository](https://github.com/docker/compose)
- [Docker Compose File Reference](https://docs.docker.com/compose/compose-file/)
- [Best Practices for Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/production/)

Commit message:

Clean up repository: remove temporary files and scripts
Removed:
- Python processing scripts (6 files): conversion, formatting, and fixing scripts
- Raw HTML files from Blogger scraping (blog_posts_only/ directory with 61 files)
- Documentation/report files (7 files): conversion reports, examples, setup guides
- Test files: blog-test.html, start-server.sh, start-server.bat

Added:
- AI-generated disclaimer to sample blog post

Repository now contains only:
- Production website files (index.html, blog.html, styles.css, etc.)
- Blog content (blogs/ directory with markdown files)
- Images (images/ directory)
- Essential documentation (HOW_TO_ADD_NEW_BLOG.md, BLOG_TEMPLATE.md, README.md)

blogs/sample-docker-compose-guide.md, after:

---
title: "Getting Started with Docker Compose: A Practical Guide"
date: "2025-01-15"
category: "DevOps"
tags: ["Docker", "Docker Compose", "Containers", "DevOps"]
excerpt: "Learn how to use Docker Compose to manage multi-container applications. This guide covers the basics of docker-compose.yml files, common commands, and a practical example of deploying a web application with a database."
author: "Roshan Nagekar"
---

![Docker Compose Banner](/images/blog-images/sample-docker-compose-guide/docker-compose-banner.svg)

> **⚠️ Note:** This is an AI-generated sample blog post created to demonstrate the blog creation workflow. It is provided for reference purposes only to showcase the blog structure, markdown formatting, and image integration capabilities.

## Introduction

**Docker Compose** is a powerful tool for defining and running multi-container Docker applications. Instead of managing multiple containers individually, you can define your entire application stack in a single YAML file and manage it with simple commands.

In this guide, you'll learn how to use Docker Compose to orchestrate multiple containers, making your development and deployment workflow much simpler.

## Why Docker Compose?

Before Docker Compose, developers had to:

- Run multiple `docker run` commands with complex arguments
- Manually link containers together
- Keep track of environment variables across containers
- Restart containers in the correct order

**Docker Compose** solves all of these problems with declarative configuration.

## Prerequisites

Before we begin, make sure you have:

- Docker installed on your system
- Basic understanding of Docker containers
- A text editor for creating configuration files

## Installing Docker Compose

Docker Compose comes pre-installed with Docker Desktop. For Linux users, you can install it separately:

```bash
# Download Docker Compose
sudo curl -L "https://github.com/docker/compose/releases/latest/download/docker-compose-$(uname -s)-$(uname -m)" -o /usr/local/bin/docker-compose

# Make it executable
sudo chmod +x /usr/local/bin/docker-compose

# Verify installation
docker-compose --version
```

## Basic Docker Compose Structure

A `docker-compose.yml` file defines services, networks, and volumes. Here's the basic structure:

```yaml
version: '3.8'

services:
  service-name:
    image: image-name:tag
    ports:
      - "host:container"
    environment:
      - KEY=value
    volumes:
      - host-path:container-path
```

## Practical Example: Web App with Database

Let's build a complete example with a **Node.js** application and a **PostgreSQL** database.

![Application Architecture](/images/blog-images/sample-docker-compose-guide/architecture-diagram.svg)

### Step 1: Create the Project Structure

```bash
mkdir my-docker-app
cd my-docker-app
```

### Step 2: Create docker-compose.yml

```yaml
version: '3.8'

services:
  # PostgreSQL Database
  database:
    image: postgres:15-alpine
    container_name: my_postgres_db
    environment:
      POSTGRES_USER: myuser
      POSTGRES_PASSWORD: mypassword
      POSTGRES_DB: myappdb
    ports:
      - "5432:5432"
    volumes:
      - postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data
    networks:
      - app-network
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD-SHELL", "pg_isready -U myuser"]
      interval: 10s
      timeout: 5s
      retries: 5

  # Node.js Application
  webapp:
    image: node:18-alpine
    container_name: my_node_app
    working_dir: /app
    environment:
      DATABASE_URL: postgres://myuser:mypassword@database:5432/myappdb
      NODE_ENV: development
    ports:
      - "3000:3000"
    volumes:
      - ./app:/app
      - /app/node_modules
    command: npm start
    depends_on:
      database:
        condition: service_healthy
    networks:
      - app-network

  # Redis Cache (Optional)
  cache:
    image: redis:7-alpine
    container_name: my_redis_cache
    ports:
      - "6379:6379"
    networks:
      - app-network

volumes:
  postgres_data:

networks:
  app-network:
    driver: bridge
```

### Step 3: Understanding the Configuration

Let's break down the key components:

| Component | Purpose | Example |
|-----------|---------|---------|
| services | Defines containers to run | webapp, database, cache |
| ports | Maps host:container ports | "3000:3000" |
| volumes | Persists data and mounts code | postgres_data, ./app:/app |
| networks | Allows container communication | app-network |
| depends_on | Controls startup order | webapp depends on database |

## Essential Docker Compose Commands

Here are the most common commands you'll use:

```bash
# Start all services in detached mode
docker-compose up -d

# View running services
docker-compose ps

# View logs from all services
docker-compose logs

# View logs from a specific service
docker-compose logs webapp

# Follow logs in real-time
docker-compose logs -f

# Stop all services
docker-compose stop

# Stop and remove containers, networks
docker-compose down

# Stop and remove everything including volumes
docker-compose down -v

# Rebuild images
docker-compose build

# Restart a specific service
docker-compose restart webapp
```

![Docker Compose Commands](/images/blog-images/sample-docker-compose-guide/commands-cheatsheet.svg)

## Advanced Features

### Environment Variables

You can use a `.env` file to manage environment variables:

```bash
# .env file
POSTGRES_VERSION=15
NODE_VERSION=18
APP_PORT=3000
```

Then reference them in `docker-compose.yml`:

```yaml
services:
  webapp:
    image: node:${NODE_VERSION}-alpine
    ports:
      - "${APP_PORT}:3000"
```

### Scaling Services

You can scale services to run multiple instances:

```bash
# Run 3 instances of the webapp
docker-compose up -d --scale webapp=3
```

### Health Checks

Health checks ensure services are ready before dependent services start:

```yaml
healthcheck:
  test: ["CMD", "curl", "-f", "http://localhost:3000/health"]
  interval: 30s
  timeout: 10s
  retries: 3
  start_period: 40s
```

## Best Practices

1. **Use specific image tags** - Don't use `latest` in production
2. **Separate development and production configs** - Use `docker-compose.prod.yml`
3. **Keep secrets secure** - Use Docker secrets or external secret management
4. **Use .dockerignore** - Exclude unnecessary files from the build context
5. **Named volumes for data** - Never use bind mounts for database data in production

> **Tip:** Always use health checks for databases and critical services to ensure proper startup order.

## Common Issues and Solutions

### Issue 1: Port Already in Use

**Problem:** `Error: bind: address already in use`

**Solution:**
```bash
# Find what's using the port
sudo lsof -i :3000

# Stop the conflicting service or change the port mapping
ports:
  - "3001:3000"
```

### Issue 2: Volume Permission Errors

**Problem:** Permission denied when writing to volumes

**Solution:**
```yaml
services:
  webapp:
    user: "${UID}:${GID}"  # Use host user ID
```

### Issue 3: Containers Can't Communicate

**Problem:** Containers can't reach each other

**Solution:** Ensure they're on the same network and use service names (not localhost):
```yaml
# Use this
DATABASE_URL: postgres://database:5432

# Not this
DATABASE_URL: postgres://localhost:5432
```

## Real-World Use Cases

Docker Compose is perfect for:

- **Development environments** - Replicate production locally
- **CI/CD pipelines** - Consistent test environments
- **Microservices architecture** - Manage multiple services
- **Integration testing** - Spin up dependencies quickly

## Monitoring and Debugging

### View Resource Usage

```bash
# Check container stats
docker stats

# Or using compose
docker-compose top
```

### Execute Commands in Running Containers

```bash
# Access database shell
docker-compose exec database psql -U myuser -d myappdb

# Access application shell
docker-compose exec webapp sh

# Run a one-off command
docker-compose run webapp npm test
```

## Summary

In this guide, we covered:

- Installing and setting up Docker Compose
- Understanding the docker-compose.yml structure
- Building a multi-container application with database and cache
- Essential commands for managing containers
- Best practices and common troubleshooting

**Docker Compose** simplifies container orchestration and makes it easy to define complex applications as code.

## Conclusion

Docker Compose is an essential tool in the modern DevOps toolkit. By defining your infrastructure as code, you gain reproducibility, version control, and simplified deployment workflows.

Start small with a single service, then gradually add more components as you become comfortable with the tool. The declarative nature of Docker Compose makes it easy to understand and maintain your application architecture.

Happy containerizing! 🐋

---

## References

- [Official Docker Compose Documentation](https://docs.docker.com/compose/)
- [Docker Compose GitHub Repository](https://github.com/docker/compose)
- [Docker Compose File Reference](https://docs.docker.com/compose/compose-file/)
- [Best Practices for Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/production/)
